For my CS 360 mobile application project, I developed a Weight Tracker app. The goal of the app was to give users a simple way to create an account, log in, enter daily weight data, view saved weight entries, update existing entries, delete entries, and receive optional SMS notifications when they reach a goal weight. The app was designed to address the need for a straightforward weight tracking tool that does not overwhelm users with unnecessary features. It focuses on helping users monitor progress toward a personal health or fitness goal.

My CS 360 mobile application project for this quarter was a Weight Tracker application. The application allows a user to save their weight in the past. The user can add the current day’s weight and also save in past weight entries. A user can edit past weight entries and then save the updated weight for themselves. A user also is able to delete past weight entries to better track themselves. An optional feature was to set a goal weight and have SMS notifications sent when the user reached their set goal weight for weight loss. My CS 360 mobile application for this quarter was a health/fitness tracking application. The application is straightforward with minimal features to confuse a user and take away from the main goal of the application.

What screens and features were necessary to support user needs and produce a user-centered UI for the app? How did your UI designs keep users in mind? Why were your designs successful?

I designed my application to begin with an initial login screen for returning users and an Account Creator for new users to register accounts. Once a user has logged in successfully, the user is directed to the Main Weight Tracking Screen where users can add new weight entries. The new entry will include fields for date, weight, goal weight, and even a phone number to send SMS notifications when the user reaches their goal weight. Users are able to review their previous weight entries by viewing the saved weight entries in a grid/table format on the Main Weight Tracking Screen. In addition, users can update and delete saved weight entries by pressing the update and delete buttons respectively for each saved weight entry. I attempted to keep the users in mind throughout the design of the screens to create a simple and efficient workflow. The layout of the screens, labels, simple navigation, large enough and readable buttons all enabled the users to easily determine the purpose of the screen and complete all of the main tasks without any further instructions. Overall, I believe the design of these screens was very successful.

How did you approach the process of coding your app? What techniques or strategies did you use? How could those techniques or strategies be applied in the future?

I went step by step creating the application in sections. First I created the login page along with the appropriate layout files. Next I created the SQLite database helper along with methods for creating accounts, for users logging in, for users saving their weight entries, and for the CRUD (create, read, update, delete) functionality for the weight entries. After completing the main functionality of the application, I completed the SMS permission functionality. Throughout the project I made sure to use clear variable names, split up the .java files into appropriate classes (e.g. a class for the SQLite database helper, a class for the account creator), and added comments to the code to make the application and .java files easier to understand. For testing the application I used the Android Emulator in Android Studio and used the build output to check for errors in the .java files. For future projects I would make sure to split up the work into single features, test them often, and keep the code organized.

How did you test to ensure your code was functional? Why is this process important, and what did it reveal?

To test this app, I used the Android Emulator and tested out account creation and login, including instances where the login was invalid. I also tested the database to ensure that the weight entries that the user put into the app were being stored. After that, I worked on testing out the CRUD functionality for the weight entries. This included adding in weight entries and saving them, viewing the saved weight entries in a table, updating the saved weight entries, and finally deleting the saved weight entries. I also made sure to test out the saved weight entries to make sure that they were still there even after the user had closed the app and then reopened it. In addition to this, I also worked on testing the SMS feature of the app. This included adding in a phone number for the user’s goal weight, and then testing out the app to see if it requests the app’s SMS permission and then to see what the app does after the user has allowed the app’s SMS permission to be requested and then after the user had denied the app’s SMS permission to be requested. Testing out an app is a vital part of the design and development process because it tests out the app to make sure that it is functioning as intended and it can also reveal bugs in the app before it is distributed to the public. For this app, I found several bugs including problems with the layout IDs, how the weight entries are displayed in a table, problems with the update feature, and problems with how the app handled the SMS permission.

Consider the full process of app design and development from the very beginning until the very end of the finalization of the application. What innovative solutions you came up with to solve any problems that you encountered throughout the process of design and implementation of the mobile application.

A major aspect of the Weight Tracker application was the challenge to connect the mobile application screens to the code written in the Java files as well as to the SQLite database. At the beginning of the CS 360 Project Three the mobile application screens where just designed. For the Project Three the screens had to be made functional. Connecting the layout elements of the screen (for example: the “Add Entry” button, the two text fields for the username and password to login into an already created account, the several text fields for entering weight information, the table view to display saved weight entries, the two buttons to update or to delete a weight entry, etc.) to the corresponding Java methods in the Java files was a major challenge. Another challenge was the update function for the weight entries in the database. In the beginning the update function was thought to be implemented like the function to add a new weight entry. After some thinking the update function was finally implemented by first selecting an already saved weight entry with an “Update” button. The saved data for the selected weight entry (date, weight, goal weight and also the phone number for SMS notification) then is filled into the input fields (date, weight, goal weight and for the SMS notification the phone number) to edit the weight entry. After editing the entered weight information then the edited weight entry is saved with a “Save Update” button instead of with the “Save Entry” button to add a new weight entry. This way all of the requirements for create, read, update and delete for the weight entries are fulfilled by the Weight Tracker mobile application.

What component of your application were you able to effectively utilize your knowledge, skills, and experience to create?

I was also pretty successful with the database (SQLite) for weight entries as well as user accounts in this application. In the application for weight entries as well as user accounts, the data input by the user will be saved after the application has been closed by the user and then retrieved by the application the next time the user opens up the application. In the application for weight entries, the user will be able to create a new weight entry as well as view all past weight entries in a grid/table format. The user will also be able to update a weight entry as well as delete a weight entry that the user no longer needs. All of these functions for the weight entries are considered to be part of the CRUD (create, read, update, delete) functions. I was also very successful with the SMS functionality of the application. This application only requests the permission to send SMS that the application needs. And even if the user were to deny this permission, the application would still function.
